# git as a backup/sync tool

working title for the movie being made of this epic:

<center>
***To Abuse or not to Abuse***
</center>

----

[[TOC]]

----

### UGFWIINI

All this is largely UGFWIINI ("using git for what it is not intended").  Being
a generic backup/sync tool is one of those things that git was not really
meant to do.

At the same time, I'm a great fan of
[Macgyver](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088559/), so to hell with the "not
intended" stuff, mmmkay? :-)

### how to decide if git is it

There are a few questions you have to ask yourself if you're considering git
as a generic backup/sync tool:

1.  do I really want branching and merging?

    Other forms of this question are:

      * will the history of these files have alternative timelines? (ie, will
        it be more than just a straight line)
      * if I ever revisit or rollback to a prior version, will it be based on
        something *other than* time?  (ie., not just "last night", "last
        week", "1st of the month", etc.)
      * will the commits be manual and will I be making meaningful commit
        messages?  (ie it's not just automated to run via cron or something)

    If the answer to most, or all, of these questions is "no", you're using a
    very powerful VCS as nothing more than a backup tool.

2.  are all the files really related?  On the rare occasions when I do restore
    something, will I be restoring the entire state of the working tree (ie,
    not just a few files/directories)?

    If it is quite common to restore only part of the tree from an older
    version, then it is likely that the set of files in the repo are not
    related to each other.

3.  do I really want all versions of my files, forever, or say 2 years old
    (for example)?  Will I ever need to see such files?

    This is not about disk space -- git doesn't need a lot anyway.  It's about
    adding complexity to an otherwise simple task.  If you never want to see
    such old files again, why use git?

### alternatives to rolling your own

You can use something like etckeeper, which hides all the issues that git has
with being a true backup solution.

Or go for 'bup', which is much more powerful, but still a work in progress
(meaning I have not switched to it yet ;-)

Still, for most people considering git for **backup**, the closest, correct,
choice is [rdiff-backup](http://rdiff-backup.nongnu.org/) which is available,
and maybe even installed by default, in most distributions of Linux.  It
stores the most recent version as is (you can do a plain `cp` to restore), and
older versions as "reverse deltas" using the rsync algorithm.  So, what rsync
does only for network bandwidth, rdiff-backup extends to disk space as well!
This is still not as efficient as git (because the topmost revision is not
compressed), but good enough for most people.  It also has a handy
"remove-older-than" option to prune old backups, which can make this whole
thing pretty much fire and forget using a script+cron.

There are many other similar schemes that build on rsync; investigate or ask
around.

The best choice for **synchronisation** is
[unison](http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~bcpierce/unison/).  It has a few quirks
(like being overly version sensitive) but if you install the same version on
both sides it's a wonderful program.

Both of these work over ssh, so security is taken care of sensibly.

### how I version all the important stuff in my `$HOME`

Having said all that, I do version *some parts* of my home envionment using
git.  Here's how.

**First things first**: git does **not** track permissions except the first
"x" in `rwxrwxrwx`.  Do not use this for anything where ownership or
permissions are important.

#### my needs

I want to version control

  * some of my dot-files, not all of them
  * all the dozens of custom scripts in my `~/bin`
  * some notes and other files in `~/notes`, `~/docs`, etc. (for example) that
    are related to these scripts

#### basic idea

The basic idea is you put your project in a directory called `sitastuff` and
`git init` that.  Here're the details:

1.  put everything in this directory that does not *have to* be in `$HOME` and
    is willing to be placed elsewhere by using an environment variable.  For
    example, `.wgetrc`, `.curlrc`, `.less`, `.vimrc`

2.  make environment variables pointing to them, like so, and put them all in
    one file which we'll call "extra.bashrc".  For example:

        export SITASTUFF=~/sitastuff
        export LESSKEY=$SITASTUFF/.less
        export VIMINIT="so $SITASTUFF/.vimrc"
        export CURL_HOME=$SITASTUFF
        export WGETRC=$SITASTUFF/.wgetrc

3.  make a directory called `symlinks` within `sitastuff`

4.  find all the stuff that *must* be in `$HOME` and put it in here.  For
    example, `.irssi`, `.lftprc`, etc.

5.  to your `extra.bashrc` script add the following lines

        for i in $sitastuff/symlinks/*
        do
            ln -s $i $HOME
        done 2>/dev/null

6.  move `~/bin` to `~/sitastuff/bin`, and add another line to your
    `extra.bashrc` which appends `~/sitastuff/bin` to the PATH.  Also move your
    `~/notes` and `~/docs` or whatever.  If you wish, you can move them into
    the `symlinks` directory to have them accessible straight from `$HOME`.

Now all you do is add one line to your normal .bashrc

    source ~/sitastuff/extra.bashrc

#### advantages

1.  `git status` is much more meaningful (see below); a very big advantage

2.  when I have to start working on a new machine, I clone this repo, add that
    one line to the default `.bashrc`, and I'm in business

3.  more importantly, when I have to *stop* using that machine (as in, it
    belongs to some other project but I was helping them with something for a
    short while), I just delete `~/sitastuff`, remove that one line from the
    `~/.bashrc`, and their system is back to where it was.

##### about that `git status` thing...

Some people just do a `git init` in `$HOME` and add stuff as they need.  This
has two problems: `git status` output is too long and pretty much useless, and
so adding new files is something you have to remember.

Using the symlink method mitigates problem 1.  It also mitigates problem 2 for
situations where the top level directory is already tracked.  My classic
example is `~/.irssi`.  Once this is inside `~/sitastuff` (actually inside
`~/sitastuff/symlinks`) and is being tracked, if I put a new script inside it,
`git status` will show me I have a new script and I can remember to add it.

Of course, neither method can tell you about a new file that you should be
adding, if it's mixed in with all the other junk in `$HOME`.

#### criticism

Some people are very pedantic about the fact that git is meant to track whole
trees of connected files, and using it like this is "abusing git".  I was told
(by a veritable legend in the perl world, and now you can guess who that is!)
to "stop abusing git".  He was polite (as usual -- he never seems to get
ruffled; would love to meet him someday; during my days on clpm I really grew
to admire the guy) but he seemed to feel very strongly about this and almost
seemed upset at what I was doing!

From my point of view, all the stuff I do this with is essentially code.  My
toolkit, if you like.  For instance, bits of my .vimrc are connected with some
scriptlets I write, which may in turn rely on .lftprc for something or other.
I can't honestly say they're all completely unrelated files, they need
versioning in the source code sense, not the zfs sense, and I have to work on
them on multiple machines, and it all has to sync up.  There really isn't any
better way that I know of.  I mean it *has* to be a VCS, not just a fancy file
system.  And I'm certainly not about to learn some other VCS at this age :-)

So, at least until PETVCS (people for the ethical treatment of version control
systems) starts a demonstration outside my door, I will continue to do this.

And they have to be young, female, and un[der]-dressed, or it doesn't count :-)
